2. Friendship

A certain father was doubly blessed—he had reached a good old age, and
had ten sons. One day he called them to his side, and after repeated
expressions of affection, told them that he had acquired a fortune by
industry and economy, and would give them one hundred gold pieces each
before his death, so that they might begin business for themselves, and
not be obliged to wait until he had passed away. It happened, however,
that, soon after, he lost a portion of his property, much to his regret,
and had only nine hundred and fifty gold pieces left. So he gave one
hundred to each of his nine sons. When his youngest son, whom he loved
most of all, asked naturally what was to be his share, the father replied:

"My son, I promised to give each of thy brothers one hundred gold
pieces. I shall keep my word to them. I have fifty left. Thirty I shall
reserve for my funeral expenses, and twenty will be thy portion. But
understand this—I possess, in addition, ten friends, whom I give over to
thee as compensation for the loss of the eighty gold pieces. Believe me,
they are worth more than all the gold and silver."

The youth tenderly embraced his parent, and assured him that he was
content, such was his confidence and affection. In a few days the father
died, and the nine sons took their money, and without a thought of their
youngest brother and the small amount he had received, followed each his
own fancy. But the youngest son, although his portion was the least,
resolved to heed his father's words, and hold fast to the ten friends.
When a short time had elapsed he prepared a simple feast, went to the
ten friends of his father, and said to them: "My father, almost in his
last words, asked me to keep you, his friends, in honor. Before I leave
this place to seek my fortune elsewhere, will you not share with me a
farewell meal, and aid me thus to comply with his dying request?"

The ten friends, stirred by his earnestness and cordiality, accepted his
invitation with pleasure, and enjoyed the repast, although they were
used to richer fare. When the moment for parting arrived, however, one
of them rose and spoke: "My friends, it seems to me that of all the sons
of our dear friend that has gone, the youngest alone is mindful of his
father's friendship for us, and reverences his memory. Let us, then, be
true friends to him, for his own sake as well, and provide for him a
generous sum, that he may begin business here, and not be forced to live
among strangers."

The proposal, so unexpected and yet so merited, was received with
applause. The youth, proud of their friendship, soon became a prosperous
merchant, who never forgot that faithful friends were more valuable than
gold or silver, and left an honored name to his descendants.
