        THE REAL PRINCESS

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN
(Version by Alice Corbin Henderson)

There was once a Prince who wanted to marry a Princess. But it was only
a /real/ Princess that he wanted to marry.

He traveled all over the world to find a real one. But, although there
were 180 plenty of princesses, whether they were /real/ princesses he
could never discover. There was always something that did not seem quite
right about them.

At last he had to come home again. But he was very sad, because he
wanted to marry a /real/ Princess.

One night there was a terrible storm. It thundered and lightened and the
rain poured down in torrents. In the middle of the storm there came a
knocking, knocking, knocking at the castle gate. The kind old King
himself went down to open the castle gate.

It was a young Princess that stood outside the gate. The wind and the
rain had almost blown her to pieces. Water streamed out of her hair and
out of her clothes. Water ran in at the points of her shoes and out
again at the heels. Yet she said that she was a /real/ Princess.

"Well, we will soon find out about that!" thought the Queen.

She said nothing, but went into the bedroom, took off all the bedding,
and put a small dried pea on the bottom of the bedstead. Then she piled
twenty mattresses on top of the pea, and on top of these she put twenty
feather beds. This was where the Princess had to sleep that night.

In the morning they asked her how she had slept through the night.

"Oh, miserably!" said the Princess. "I hardly closed my eyes the whole
night long! Goodness only knows what was in my bed! I slept upon
something so hard that I am black and blue all over. It was dreadful!"

So then they knew that she was a /real/ Princess. For, through the
twenty mattresses and the twenty feather beds, she had still felt the
pea. No one but a /real/ Princess could have had such a tender skin.

So the Prince took her for his wife. He knew now that he had a /real/
Princess.

As for the pea, it was put in a museum where it may still be seen if no
one has carried it away.

Now this is a true story!

With some dozen exceptions, all of Andersen's Tales are based upon older
stories, either upon some old folk tale or upon something that he ran
across in his reading. Dr. Brandes, in his Eminent Authors, shows in
detail how "The Emperor's <#s04-a01> New Clothes" came into being. "One
day in turning over the leaves of Don Manuel's Count Lucanor, Andersen
became charmed by the homely wisdom of the old Spanish story, with the
delicate flavor of the Middle Ages pervading it, and he lingered over
chapter vii, which treats of how a king was served by three rogues." But
Andersen's story is a very different one in many ways from his Spanish
original. For one thing, the meaning is so universal that no one can
miss it. Most of us have, in all likelihood, at some time pretended to
know what we do not know or to be what we are not in order to save our
face, to avoid the censure or ridicule of others. "There is much
concerning which people dare not speak the truth, through cowardice,
through fear of acting otherwise than 'all the world,' through anxiety
lest they should appear stupid. And the story is eternally new and it
never ends. It has its grave side, but just because of its endlessness
it has also its humorous side." When the absurd bubble of the grand
procession is punctured by the child, whose mental honesty has not yet
been spoiled by the pressure of convention, the Emperor "held himself
stiffer than ever, and the chamberlains carried the invisible train."
For it would never do to hold up the procession!

Transcriber's Note: original reads 'Emporer's'
