          4. An Eastern Garden

In an Eastern city a lovely garden flourished, whose beauty and
luxuriance awakened much admiration. It was the owner's greatest
pleasure to watch its growth, as leaf, flower, and tree seemed daily to
unfold to brighter bloom. One morning, while taking his usual stroll
through the well-kept paths, 177 he was surprised to find that some
blossoms were picked to pieces. The next day he noticed more signs of
mischief, and rendered thus more observant he gave himself no rest until
he had discovered the culprit. It was a little trembling bird, whom he
managed to capture, and was about to kill in his anger, when it
exclaimed: "Do not kill me, I beg you, kind sir. I am only a wee, tiny
bird. My flesh is too little to satisfy you. I would not furnish
one-hundredth of a meal to a man of your size. Let me free without any
hesitation, and I shall teach you something that will be of much use to
you and your friends."

"I would dearly like to put an end to you," replied the man, "for you
were rapidly putting an end to my garden. It is a good thing to rid the
world of such annoyances. But as I am not revengeful, and am always glad
to learn something useful, I shall set you free this time." And he
opened his hand to give the bird more air.

"Attention!" cried the bird. "Here are three rules which should guide
you through life, and if you observe them you will find your path made
easier: Do not cry over spilt milk; do not desire what is unattainable,
and do not believe what is impossible."

The man was satisfied with the advice, and let the bird escape; but it
had scarcely regained its liberty, when, from a high tree opposite, it
exclaimed:

"What a silly man! The idea of letting me escape! If you only knew what
you have lost! But it is too late now."

"What have I lost?" the man asked, angrily.

"Why, if you had killed me, as you intended, you would have found inside
of me a huge pearl, as large as a goose's egg, and you would have been a
wealthy man forever."

"Dear little bird," the man said in his blandest tones; "sweet little
bird, I will not harm you. Only come down to me, and I will treat you as
if you were my own child, and give you fruit and flowers all day. I
assure you of this most sacredly."

But the bird shook its head sagely, and replied: "What a silly man, to
forget so soon the advice which was given him in all seriousness. I told
you not to cry over spilt milk, and here you are, worrying over what has
happened. I urged you not to desire the unattainable, and now you wish
to capture me again. And, finally, I asked you not to believe what is
impossible, and you are rashly imagining that I have a huge pearl inside
of me, when a goose's egg is larger than my whole body. You ought to
learn your lessons better in the future, if you would become wise,"
added the bird, as with another twist of its head it flew away, and was
lost in the distance.

A classic collection of short stories from the ancient Hebrew sages is
the little book, Hebrew Tales, published in London in 1826 by the noted
Jewish scholar Hyman Hurwitz (1770-1844). A modern handy edition of this
book (about sixty tales) is published as Vol. II of the Library of
Jewish Classics. Of special interest is the fact that it contained three
stories by the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge, who had published them
first in his periodical, The Friend. Coleridge was much interested in
Hebrew literature, and especially fond of speaking in parables, as those
who know "The Ancient Mariner" will readily recall. The 178 following is
one of the three stories referred to, and it had prefixed to it the
significant text, "The Lord helpeth man and beast." (Psalm XXXVI, 6.)

